So, performance.
Along with user interface and
documentation improvements,
it's probably the longest standing
feature on most of your to-do lists.
certainly on mine.
But before we talk a little
bit about performance and the
black art of performance tuning,
Probably a good idea to think a
little bit about why we care about
performance in the first place.
I mean,
performance tuning is a lot of work.
It can sometimes lead to some
fairly uncertain results.
We're all pretty busy anyway.
I mean, if it's not a sure thing,
why bother at all?
So first and foremost,
if you're competing in the marketplace
against other applications,
superior application performance is
a first-order competitive advantage.
Your customers that are dutiful
at any rate will be comparing
your app against others.
Magazine reviews will also run
competitive comparisons in which
a 1% or 2% performance margin may
mean the difference between the
top and the bottom of the list of
their recommended applications.
In addition to that,
your customers themselves are probably
your most powerful advertising medium.
If they like your application
because it performs well,
they'll say nice things
about you to their coworkers,
to other people in the industry
at conferences like this,
and they'll also be more favorably
inclined towards your other products.
You can impress your customers
a couple of different ways.
With the push towards more
mobile systems in particular,
a theme you'll be hearing
from me quite a bit today is
efficiency versus performance.
If your application
not only performs well,
but is efficient on a portable system,
that means more battery
life and less heat.
Both of those things are things that
customers are very sensitive to.
In addition to that,
if your application performs
its basic tasks well,
you have effectively
surplus performance left.
You can add animations,
other user interface niceties that will
again impress and please your customers.
You can also potentially do more complex,
more sophisticated things in your
application's regular workflow.
And if you're trying to add a
new feature to your application,
the performance of that feature is
often one of the gating criteria.
If you can't make it fast enough,
it'll never make it
in in the first place.
And so performance doesn't
just adjust how your customers
feel about existing features.
It literally determines whether or not
you'll get a feature in the first place.
We're talking today particularly
about resource-hungry applications,
and so it's relevant and important
to think about what hunger actually
is in this context and how that
affects the distribution of resources.
Mac OS X's fairly free
with its resources.
The overall philosophy is that if
an application wants something,
the system will give
it to that application.
So if we're talking about resources,
what sort of resources?
We have CPU time,
time on I/O peripherals.
We have access to and
allocation of memory,
storage space,
mass storage in particular, power.
And as I said, X is very free and giving
with those resources.
And so you need to be aware of the
fact that when you're using a resource,
there's a good chance that
you're actually taking it
away from someone else.
That actually brings up
something of a critical point,
which is that hunger itself,
along with performance,
is really a subjective thing.
If there are abundant resources,
the fact that you're using a lot of them
doesn't necessarily matter a great deal.
But if you're competing either
with other applications,
with the system, or with yourself,
despite the fact that your
workload hasn't changed,
you are, in that context,
a hungry application.
It's fair to say that when
your application is doing work,
everything takes time.
Your code takes time to run,
your I/Os take time to perform,
the system takes time to respond
to requests that you've made to it.
And most of these resources,
these time-bounded resources,
are single-use.
If you're running code on a
particular core in the processor,
no one else is running
it at the same time.
If the disk subsystem is
doing work directly related
to an I/O that you've issued,
no one else is getting that
same work done at the same time.
With regards to the actual
application of these resources,
CPU scheduling is managed
in a fairly conventional
priority-based round-robin scheme.
We do have a number of tweaks
in the system that attempt
to maintain responsiveness.
From the application perspective,
you should mostly ignore those because
we're trying to second-guess you.
And if you second-guess us,
bad things happen.
I/O scheduling varies
greatly with the device.
If your application is
particularly sensitive to that,
you need to actually spend some
time to understand how individual
peripherals respond to multiple requests,
particularly in a
heavily loaded situation.
That's not really something I can
offer you any general guidance on here.
It's very much situationally dependent.
Memory is quite possibly the most
abused resource in our system.
Virtual space,
most people think of as free,
and to be sure, allocating virtual space
doesn't cost you a great deal.
It's a relatively efficient operation.
It does, however, have some overheads.
Every allocation that you make
consumes wide kernel memory,
and that wide kernel memory in turn
is a consumption of physical memory.
It also consumes kernel virtual space.
So whilst it's mostly free,
it's not entirely free.
You find that you're competing
for virtual space against other
portions of your own application,
as well as frameworks that
you're linked against that
are doing work on your behalf.
Of course, if you want to do anything
with our virtual space,
you need physical memory to back it.
And physical memory is
most certainly not free.
Finding physical pages
requires substantial work,
typically because we are trying
to satisfy the requests of
everyone else in the system,
including the disk caching subsystem.
Physical memory is
almost always spoken for.
If you have customers who,
if you yourself have noticed
that applications such as
Top or the Activity Monitor,
once a system has been up for
any appreciable period of time,
report no free memory.
Well, that's good.
We're using that memory for something.
But it means that if your
application needs it,
you're taking it away from
whoever currently has it.
When thinking about the use of memory,
it's important to understand that
memory is managed in page-sized quanta.
On all of our currently shipping systems,
this is 4 kilobytes.
It means that any time you touch
memory or allocate memory and use it,
you're using a 4 kilobyte quantum.
The fact that you've allocated
an 8-byte object notwithstanding,
that's 4 kilobytes that you've
consumed that are currently
being denied both the system and
potentially other applications.
I mentioned that memory is taken away.
So we use a modified LRU algorithm.
Anyone who's taken a kindergarten-level
operating systems course will be familiar
with the two-handed clock algorithm.
We've stuck with it for a long time
for the simple reason that it works.
We have a few modifications that help
us prioritize things such as disk
cache pages are reclaimed slightly
more readily than other pages.
But fundamentally,
we stick with this because it's simple,
it's fast, and for the vast
majority of applications,
it does a very good job.
Unfortunately,
if you actually completed that
kindergarten-level OS course,
you'll be well aware that in
situations of heavy page use,
when the working set of the system
actually outstrips the available
physical memory in the system,
your algorithm breaks
down almost completely.
And so there's a very sharp knee
in performance when you manage
to push the working set beyond
the available physical memory.
Virtually everything in the system
will come to an apparent standstill.
We'll talk a little bit about degenerate
conditions later and why it's important
for you to be able to recognize these
and perhaps moderate your behavior.
Mass storage poses its own
set of interesting challenges
when it comes to optimization.
If you are using large
amounts of storage,
You will have faced the
challenge of actually organizing
the data in that storage.
It's very popular to use the file
system namespace as a low-rent
database to partition your data into
a collection of files and directories.
Now, this can be fairly efficient,
particularly if you don't feel like
writing a database or if you want
to take advantage of the fact that
the file system will cache both the
directory metadata and the file data
in order to speed up your application.
But you need to understand that there
are costs associated with all of this.
Caching that file system
metadata consumes,
again, kernel, virtual,
and physical space.
It also imposes overheads in
actually accessing these files.
Each directory lookup may
potentially involve a disk access.
It certainly involves several different
page references inside the kernel.
As far as allocation
strategies are concerned,
disk space is shared.
You can certainly impose quotas,
but they're typically used
in an administrative fashion
on a per-user basis rather
than a per-application basis.
So between applications,
it's fair to say that disk
space is shared on a first-come,
first-served basis.
It is possible for an application
to make disk space reservations
if it's particularly critical that
disk space actually be available.
There's a feature that's only
available on some file systems,
but the vast majority of our
systems installed using HFS+
as the local root file system.
So you can be fairly certain that
if you need to make a reservation,
you can do that on the root volume.
As I pointed out to begin with,
performance tuning is considered
something of a black art,
which is really kind of unfair
because it's not super difficult.
But to get folks started
and on the right foot,
I'm proposing a five-step
program for better performance.
You can come up with seven more
steps if you feel that's important,
but I'm going to stick to five.
The first is to avoid unnecessary work.
I'm going to expand on these more,
so I'm not going to talk too
much about them right now.
The second,
which seems like it completely
contradicts the first,
is to keep busy.
Third is to be a good citizen.
As I've already alluded,
your actions affect the
behavior of the system,
and likewise, the actions of other
applications will affect you.
It's important to get along.
When it comes to actually attempting
to assess your performance,
don't guess.
Don't say, "Hey, that looks snappy.
That was a bit quicker than last time,
I'm sure." Measure it.
And finally,
when you're actually looking to
find things that you can improve,
take advantage of other people's work.
Apple in particular provides
you with an enormous collection
of ready-optimized algorithms,
code, and services.
I'll talk very briefly about
those a little bit later on.
too many steps involved.
Modern software architecture
emphasizes modularity and code reuse.
There's a great pressure on time
to market and time to feature.
These are great techniques
for achieving those goals,
but they introduce some
unfortunate overheads.
and quite often,
it can lead to significant
performance problems.
As I mentioned before,
pretty much everything
that you do takes time.
The more time that you
spend doing something,
the longer that in the end
ultimately it's going to take,
and thus the less performance
is actually perceived.
But this actually brings up
an interesting side point that
I'm going to get back to a
couple times again later on,
which is the difference between
performance and efficiency.
Performance is typically measured
in the time it takes to perform some
task or the number of tasks that
you can perform in some unit time.
Efficiency you can measure
slightly differently,
which is the amount of total
actual work done by the system
in order to perform this task.
In the simplest situation,
you have a chain of
directly dependent steps,
and so performance and efficiency
are ultimately the same thing.
But with multi-core,
multi-threaded systems
with asynchronous work,
with peripherals doing work for you,
the dependency chain between
individual work units is not
necessarily quite so straightforward.
And so you can complete a
task in the same elapsed time,
but with very different efficiency.
Efficiency is particularly
critical when we talk about power,
which I'll get to a little
bit later on as well.
So doing less work seems obvious,
but after a few years actually analyzing
the performance of various applications,
you realize that maybe this
isn't necessarily quite the case.
How much work an application does,
the amount of work that it ends up doing
in order to perform some sort of task,
depends on a whole variety of things.
The architecture chosen
for the application,
the specific algorithms
used in its implementation,
the tools,
the language in which it was written,
the libraries,
all that sort of stuff plays into the
overall performance of an application,
before we start talking about bugs,
misunderstandings of components,
and so on and so forth.
Talking about implementation decisions,
and as I've mentioned
on the previous slide,
there's a great trend
towards component reuse.
And when you combine that with
a great deal of pressure on many
of you to get things out the
door as quickly as possible,
you often find components that
aren't really well-suited to the
task being pressed in because they
get you past the feature point.
There's also the fact that many
of these components are opaque.
You're encouraged to
consider them as black boxes,
and so you don't have a great deal of
visibility into their overall behavior.
And sometimes the behavior of those
blocks is actually misrepresented,
perhaps because someone
wants you to pay for them,
perhaps because you simply misunderstood
the way that it's being described.
So when you're putting together
a piece of software and you are
using other people's components,
you're using system-provided services,
maybe you're just doing
some stuff yourself,
it's important to understand how much it
actually costs you to do these things.
There are some
particularly relevant ones,
given that I'm beating up on
modular software design right now.
Cross-module costs.
There's the obvious cost of
calling another function,
the fact that it potentially
perturbs the code flow,
it has impacts on the cache.
The calling convention,
the setting up of arguments
and tearing them down.
If this is a function that
you call very frequently,
you may spend a lot of meta-work
simply calling it in the first place.
On the larger scale,
you often find yourself
performing format conversions,
packing structures,
building things up into XML plists
just to tear them down again on the
other side of the call interface.
All of these things are costs that
are directly associated with the
choice of modular architecture,
and these things need to be
considered when you're actually
designing your application.
Or alternatively,
when you're reconsidering the
design of your application in
order to meet a performance target.
There are a couple of special
costs that are associated
with calling system services.
A lot of services on Mac OS X are
implemented as separate processes,
and so you'll find that there is overhead
involved in inter-process communication.
If you have the luxury of specifying
or deciding on an interface,
you may find yourself making trade-offs
between convenience and performance.
Calling the kernel directly
also imposes some overhead.
There's a protection boundary crossing,
obviously.
There's argument marshalling.
There are potentially credential
operations because you may be
performing something that's
actually an authorized operation.
As a general rule,
it's good to assume that
any time you invoke anything
else anywhere that it costs,
factor that in over and above whatever
it may cost that other module to actually
do the work for you in the first place.
Some specific examples of
things that are good to avoid,
as I mentioned, system calls.
But particularly when
you're making system calls,
often you're talking
about memory allocation,
file system I/O.
Frequent memory allocations.
Some of you would certainly have
seen a number of articles in the
popular hacker press about terrible
performance that Mac OS X has,
which usually devolves into,
"My goodness,
I'm calling Malik far too often."
And typically what that devolves
into subsequently is that Malik
is making memory allocations
in your process address space,
which involves calling into the kernel.
That's something that
is very good to avoid.
There's a degree of locking and
overhead involved in setting up and
tearing down address space mappings.
And if you're not doing very
much work with the virtual
space that you've set up,
you're basically wasting your time.
Likewise, small I/Os,
particularly if these I/Os are actually
going to hit a physical device,
there's a good deal of set-up
and tear-down involved in
almost any I/O operation.
So a small I/O operation's overall
elapsed runtime is dominated
by set-up and tear-down costs.
You want to amortize those much as
you amortize memory allocation costs.
In a process communication, once again,
we're talking about system
call overhead costs here.
If you're not communicating very much
information between the two processes,
you're paying a lot of overhead in order
to get that information moved around.
Shared memory operations,
particularly if you're working on
a segment that you have previously
shared with another process,
and you have lock-based or lock-free
algorithms for moving that data around,
can be much more efficient.
And obviously,
try to only ever do anything once.
Sometimes this isn't possible.
Caching the results of an
operation is just too expensive,
consumes too much space,
so you may have to trade off
the cost of caching your results
against simply re-performing
the operation at a later time.
But it's something to consider.
This one gets a slider by itself because
this really sort of reaches into the
practical implementation of the machine
itself and how your code runs on it.
Touching memory.
Anything that you do that
touches memory costs.
If you're touching stuff in the L1 cache,
that's cheaper than touching
data that's in the L2 cache.
And if it's out in main memory and you
have to take a full-on cache hit for it,
that's going to cost
you a great deal more.
So anything that you can do
to avoid touching memory,
and this goes all the way
from algorithm design,
through data structure design,
through the way that you actually lay out
the tasks that your application performs.
Avoid copying things.
I mean,
up aside from the fact that a straight-up
copy wastes virtual and physical memory,
the act of actually reading and
writing that data costs time.
It also costs power.
So think about allocating memory
for your data structures with the
patterns that you actually access
those data structures in mind.
Allocate memory,
put things in that memory that
you're going to hit multiple
times with relatively good
temporal locality of reference.
Also consider physical
locality of reference.
If you do that,
if you cluster things appropriately,
you can reduce the number of cache
lines that your algorithms use.
You can also reduce the number
of pages that you touch,
and thus the size of your working set,
which incidentally also reduces the
number of TLB entries that you'll
actually require to get the work done.
TLB entries themselves tend
to end up in the cache,
and so they compete with
your data for cache space.
So once again,
using fewer pages saves you cache lines.
If you're trying to keep the
number of pages that you use down,
as I'm encouraging you to do,
think about the way that you
actually access your data.
Linked lists are super convenient.
There are great macros for them.
There are marvelous classes.
They're nice and easy
to understand and debug.
Unfortunately,
once you put a few things in them,
they perform really badly.
Typically, if you're looking for
something in a linked list,
and you have no other indexing for it,
you're going to touch maybe half,
depending on what data
you're actually looking at,
maybe half of the entries in the list.
If the list has been built dynamically,
they're probably scattered
all over the place,
and so you're going to be touching
an enormous number of pages.
Now, it's fair to say that you've
allocated those pages,
and so you're not paying the
cost for allocating them,
but you are using those pages.
And that means that if those pages
have been reclaimed and they're
currently being used by someone else,
they have to be brought back.
Any time that you touch a page
that isn't currently resident,
the thread that is touching that
page will block synchronously
until the page can be brought back.
It's terrible for performance.
If you have the luxury of allocating
your data structures up front,
think about the patterns in which they're
accessed and try and group members,
assuming your data structure
members are smaller than a page,
within pages so that you have good
physical locality of reference.
You can also consider breaking the
data structures down so that the
portions of the data structure that you
actually access are kept separately,
and once again,
cluster those within pages with
good physical locality of reference.
Most of you would have been exposed
to the concept of indexing your data.
It's a great idea.
Here's a really simple example of how
to reduce the cache line utilization
if you are stuck with or if you're
considering a linked list implementation.
In the first example,
traversing the list,
where you're comparing the tag against
some key that you're searching for,
you're going to hit two cache
lines for every entry in the list.
One for the tag,
another one for the list entry.
In the second example,
provided that the structure is
allocated such that the first two
members don't cross a cache line,
and this is typically the case,
structure this size is likely to be
allocated on a size-aligned boundary
or something fairly close to it.
And if not,
you can ensure that yourselves.
Checking the tag will have
brought the pointer to the
next list entry into the cache,
and so when you go looking
for the next entry,
you're not going to stall
waiting for a cache fill.
So the second step that I brought up,
which does indeed sound like it's
somewhat contrary to the first,
is to keep busy.
I should perhaps qualify that.
When you have something to do,
you should always be
working on getting it done.
All the modern Macintosh systems
you can buy are at least dual-core.
Some of them have more.
It's an industry trend that
I think we can see continuing.
And so this means that if you
actually want to maximize the
performance of your application,
if you want to utilize all
of the performance that's
available to you in the system,
you need to start thinking about
how to get concurrent work performed
on your application's behalf,
whether your application itself does it,
whether you are finding enough work
for other services in the system to do,
that you can keep all of
those cores busy all the time.
If you are working on a
single-threaded application,
you're going to find that the overall
throughput of your application,
and thus its potential performance,
is nowhere near up to the maximum
potential of the system that you're on.
There are a number of system services.
In fact, the vast majority of them can be
used in asynchronous fashions.
The POSIX asynchronous I/O.
There are an enormous number of
callback-oriented operations in the
Carbon APIs and so on and so forth.
These are all great ways to
have things done on your behalf.
If you are likely to actually block,
then you need to arrange one
way or another for there to be
someone else in your application,
another thread,
another process somewhere else,
that's willing to pick up the slack,
that is likely to be ready to be
able to run to get something done
so that your task is completed.
There are a couple of
overheads associated with this.
We'll talk about a few
of them in a little bit.
These are really things that you
need to consider in the design
process as you partition your work.
A lot of applications-- this is
particularly the case with games--
tend to have been implemented in a
single threaded fashion because that's
the easy way to think about things.
It's the way that we tend to do things.
We'll do one task, and then another,
and then another.
So there's a real body of design
work that needs to be done at the
architectural level for most-- that's
probably unfair-- many applications.
And so, thinking about these pitfalls
is fairly germane at this point.
There's a lot of folklore out
there about threading and locking.
Some of it is hard won
from long experience.
Some of it is perhaps not so valuable.
I'm going to bring up a couple of
quick starter points to think about.
that combat a couple of
these common misconceptions.
But overall,
the point that I raised earlier
about how important it is to measure
and understand the behavior of
the things that you're doing in
your application is paramount here.
There's a very common conception
that locks are basically free
unless they're contested,
and unfortunately that's just not true.
Locking and unlocking imposes a fairly
significant overhead on the system.
And that's exacerbated
even more by the fact that,
particularly if you're pursuing a
very aggressive lock/unlock strategy,
the party most likely to take a lock
that you're just about to release or
you're considering holding for some
time is likely to be yourself again.
So there is considerable value
in considering exactly how
likely contention is to be.
And then once you've actually implemented
measuring to ensure that your assumptions
about contention are actually correct,
If you're not contending on a lock,
but you are taking and
releasing that lock a lot,
it suggests that maybe you could
afford to hold it for longer and spend
less time taking it and releasing it.
It's particularly important to bear
in mind that locks are serializing
operations in order to actually provide
the guarantees that they do about access
to data under and not under the lock.
They take one of the major
advantages of modern microprocessors,
that is the ability to perform
operations out of order,
and they toss it all out the window.
It's actually worse than that
because in order to maintain these
guarantees in multiprocessor systems,
every other processor in the system has
to be aware of the lock in some fashion.
And so there are system-wide overheads.
Anytime you take a lock,
you're affecting every other
processor in the system.
And so again,
there is considerable value to be had
in amortizing your use of those logs.
The cache is another resource that's
very heavily impacted by concurrency.
There are many algorithms out there
that either attempt to automatically
determine the size of the cache available
to you or query the system for that size,
and then make assumptions about
their likely performance based
on their usage of that cache.
If you're running on one of our
current Intel-based systems,
and if you've actually looked at
the architecture of these systems,
you will have noticed
that cores share cache.
This means that not only code that
you're actually aware of running,
but code that you are completely unaware
of is competing with you for cache space.
Given that you have no idea
what this code is doing,
it may be making assumptions
about cache usage as well.
You have to be much more careful
in algorithmic assumptions that you
make about the usage of the cache.
And you need to be aware of what's going
on while your algorithm is running,
because you may find yourself needing
to adapt your behavior based on what you
discern about other usage of the cache.
It's also worth bearing in
mind that if you call out,
going back to the modular
software issue again,
if you call out from your algorithm
to some other section of code,
that call and what that code does
will also affect your cache usage.
Mac OS X is a multi-user,
multi-application, multi-processor,
multi-just-about-everything
operating system.
And this is particularly relevant
to your applications because your
application will never own the system.
Even if you're the only app running,
well, even if you think you're
the only app running,
you're not.
There's a whole bunch of other ones.
They're all doing stuff.
They all have expectations
about what the system may or may
not do at at least some level.
Anything that you do on the system,
regardless of what it is,
has some impact on other
applications in the system.
If you're consuming CPU cycles,
they're CPU cycles they
might not have had.
If you're doing disk I/O,
that's disk space,
disk bandwidth that they own and have.
And in fact,
what you do affects you as well.
If your working set
is sufficiently large,
you may find yourself
cannibalizing yourself.
If you have a busy thread,
you may be taking processor
time away from other threads.
And of course,
what other applications do is
going to affect you as well.
There are a few applications that have
very consistent runtime environments.
If you're building a large
scientific application,
you have 500 machines,
a nice air-conditioned room,
you can make some fairly steady-state
assumptions about what the system
environment is going to look like.
You've got a pretty good idea of
how much physical memory you've got.
You've got a pretty good idea about
how likely you are to be competing
with someone else for processor time,
so on and so forth.
But this really isn't the general case.
Most of your applications are going to
be run in a fairly uncertain environment.
Even if your code starts out in a
controlled research environment,
as we've seen over the years,
that code tends to migrate
into general usage.
What you're doing is
actually even vaguely useful.
Someone is going to say,
"I can build a great app
around that," and they're
either going to buy your code,
use it if it's open source,
or they're going to reimplement something
based on whatever you've published.
So it's very important for
you to understand the runtime
environment for your applications
and what your expectations about
that runtime environment are.
It's also really important for you
to make good use of your resources.
Any use of a resource implies that
you're doing some sort of work.
As we've already considered,
doing work is something to
be avoided at all costs.
So make sure that when you're
actually using a resource,
you have a need for it.
You're cannibalizing those
resources from someone else,
in all likelihood.
And so you want to consider the
impact that that has on them,
and what impact may actually
come back from your doing that.
And again, the memory point,
and a term that you may hear
us bandy around a little bit,
memory pressure.
Because pages are reclaimed
on an as-needed basis,
and that need is driven by the
size of the working sets of the
applications that are currently active,
we describe the desire for
physical memory as pressure.
It tends to affect the rate at which
pages flow through the LIU cache,
which is where the
pressure term comes from.
The greater the pressure,
the faster the recycle rate for pages,
the greater the chance that
your application is going to
hit a page that it needs that,
due to this pressure,
has been reclaimed for use elsewhere.
If you consume fewer pages,
you reduce that pressure.
We've already talked about
some of the ways that you
can reduce page consumption.
Those things have a direct flow on to the
overall performance of your application
and every application in the system.
It's also good to consider
holding resources for the
shortest possible period of time.
There's obviously a trade-off here,
as I already mentioned.
Allocating these resources takes time.
Freeing them also takes time.
But there's a cost to
your holding them idle,
in that they are quite
often denied someone else.
Given that other applications in
the system can consume resources and
that we will give those resources
to them on an as-needed basis,
you can't count.
at any particular point in time on having
the resources that you actually need.
I'm sorry if this sounds kind of unfair,
but if someone else needs them
and we think that maybe they need
them more than you or they're
just asking more frequently,
we're going to give them those
resources because that means
they'll-- at least we believe that
means they'll get their job done.
You can generally assume that you get
a few CPU cycles and that you have some
pages for your program text to be in.
I mean, it's not realistic to expect
an application to adapt to its
environment if it can't run at all.
So, perhaps that makes you feel a little
bit better with the situation.
But the availability of pretty much any
other resource in the system can change
on a more or less instantaneous basis.
Even while you're running,
even if you think that interrupts
happen to be off because you're
in a device driver or something,
someone else somewhere else in the
system can be running on another core
and get their hands on a resource that
you think you ought to be able to have.
Power management will
also play into this.
Again, in order to keep the power
consumption on portable systems down,
we will moderate the processor
and performance of various
other components in the system.
And so assumptions that you've made about
the overall throughput of the system,
even just given straight-up
resource availability,
aren't necessarily valid.
All of this uncertainty means that you
need to think about your application's
ability to deal with shortages.
I don't want to make
this the normal case.
Obviously,
from a performance perspective,
you want to encourage your users to
run your application in an environment
where the resources that the application
is going to need will be available.
That isn't always the case,
and there are quite often situations
where they'll want to do something else.
They are willing to deal
with some degradation in the
performance of your application.
But if your application is
destroying the system by
consuming too many physical pages,
or it's just performing impossibly badly,
that's not necessarily
a great user experience.
So it's important to think about how
you go about mitigating the effect of
resource shortages on your application.
This starts with understanding what your
application actually needs in order to
get work done so that you can detect
when those resources aren't available.
If you have critical performance
criteria with regards to resources,
try reserving those resources.
In certain very specific situations,
and I want to layer this particular
point with as many caveats as I can,
you can wire down physical memory.
That is, you can guarantee that
it will not be reclaimed,
that those pages will always be present.
Obviously, that's fairly uncivilized,
but if you can't afford to take a
blocking fault for an absent page,
wiring down is your only alternative.
You can use the thread scheduling
facilities we provide to ensure
that you will get adequate CPU time,
although bear in mind that other
people can use this technique as well.
You can also obviously
pre-allocate disk files,
as I mentioned earlier.
If you can't meet your
acceptable performance target,
It's good to have a
strategy to fall back on.
Users don't much like applications
that spin the beach ball.
They don't like applications that
take inexplicably long to do things.
Having a fallback strategy that
perhaps performs half as well,
but uses a quarter of the resources-- one
possible way to deal with the situation.
Having a dialogue that says, look,
you're just doing too much.
I can't actually get this done.
You're not going to be happy.
Do something to the system.
Deal with this.
Maybe another way of going about it.
At the very least, you're being honest.
I mentioned before that
power is a resource.
Traditionally,
power has been considered a
resource that the operating
systems really responsible for,
but
This goes all the way
up and down the stack.
The hardware itself strives to be
as power-efficient as possible.
The operating system strives to
be as power-efficient as possible.
But the biggest consumers, by far,
of power in the system are applications,
applications doing work.
So you need to, once again,
consider efficiency.
The system's power management
both helps and to a degree hinders
your application's performance.
As I've already mentioned,
the system may elect to reduce the
performance of certain components
in order to meet power and thermal
guarantees that are made by the system.
That being said,
these algorithms do understand that
your application needs to get work done.
Generally, again, not a good idea to try
and second-guess them,
but one key point that I can
make is that if your application
can continue to do work,
if it can avoid performing
work in a bursty fashion,
it will interact better with the
system because that gives the
system a chance to recognize that
it's trying to get work done.
Change is a constant, what can I say?
If you're building your application to
be aware of changes in its environment,
to actually detect its performance,
to understand the availability
of resources in the system,
You're building in a good deal of
change-proofness in your application
because you're no longer making
assumptions about the fact that you're
running on a 1.8 gigahertz MacBook Pro.
You are looking at your throughput and
the availability of resources to you,
and so you can say,
whatever the system that I'm
running on happens to be,
this is how I behave.
This is another thing that will come
back to making your customers happy.
The key to improving performance in
your applications is to measure them.
Measurement isn't glamorous, it's boring,
it's a whole bunch of numbers,
it's occasionally some
interesting looking graphs.
but it's really effective.
And it's effective because in
order to actually get anything
done when it comes to tuning
performance in your application,
you're going to need
to focus your efforts.
You can't afford to spend
However many years it will take you to
go over every line in your application,
line by line,
contemplate its overall impact
on the grand scheme of things.
It's not a practical way to go
about optimizing performance.
That being said,
if you do understand the interplay
of components in your application,
that's a great place to start.
But be careful.
Guessing.
Guessing is a great way to make
mistakes and spend an awful lot
of time doing something that isn't
actually going to help you at all.
Modern software tends to
be extremely complicated,
and the interplay between
components is often very subtle.
So if you're going to measure things,
try and measure in concrete terms.
Elapsed time for a task,
total resources consumed
for a particular task,
that sort of stuff.
If you do this, and if you do this in
a repeatable fashion,
you can actually integrate it
into your development workflow.
It means that from build to build
you can monitor your performance,
you can actually justify the time
that you spend on performance
improvements if you happen to
be in a management situation
that requires that sort of thing.
And you can also say, "Look,
here is our benchmark here,
we've improved performance 15%,
that's a marketing bullet."
What you actually choose to measure
is pretty much open to debate.
Obviously, you need to measure the things
that your customers care about.
If there are key tasks that are
performed by your application,
those are great things to measure.
When it comes to efficiency,
consider the things that we've
been talking about already:
CPU cycles, pages used,
that sort of thing.
Measurement sounds like
an awful lot of work.
And it is, I guess.
But we give you a bunch of
tools to make life much,
much easier.
I'm not going to talk
too much about Shark.
There have been other presentations here.
There is an enormous amount
of documentation on the web.
Shark is a great tool for understanding
what your code is doing in the system.
It's also fairly helpful in
suggesting what you might do
about things at the lower level.
Obviously,
it doesn't know enough about what
your application actually does
at the user level to give you
high-level architectural suggestions.
But when you're looking for
visibility and visibility into the
system that understands the system,
Shark is a marvelous tool.
This week we've been introducing
a new thing called DTrace.
This comes from the good folks at Sun.
DTrace is not, in and of itself,
a performance tool.
It's an architecture and
infrastructure for building tools
that can be used for both debugging
and for performance measurement.
If you're developing-- if you're
interested in developing a specific
performance evaluation harness
for your software that considers
its use of resources and its
interaction with the system,
DTrace gives you visibility from the top
of your application all the way through
to the very lowest levels of the system.
And there are a whole bunch
of more traditional tools,
and it's in fact the traditional
tools I'm going to address because if
we're talking about focusing effort,
the first thing that you want to be
able to do is to start with a more
or less clean slate and narrow in
on the one or two worst offenders
in any particular situation.
Anyone who's worked on a Unix
system for any length of time
will be familiar with Top.
I'm not going to ask you
to read those numbers,
although they're actually
pleasantly large.
Top gives you a good view of
instantaneous overall system activity,
which processes are doing things,
This is the one I like the most because
it gives me a rapid summary of page-in,
page-out activity,
which is very relevant to the
overall system working set,
total I/Os, system calls,
and it sorts the worst
offenders to the top.
Understanding the use of the
file system by an application
is actually fairly difficult.
If you haven't instrumented the
application to tell you exactly what
it's doing with the file system,
it can be quite difficult
to actually-- well,
without this tool,
I should say-- it can be quite
difficult to understand what's going on.
FS usage will tell you what your
application is actually doing
with regards to the file system.
Paging, page add activity,
how long the I/Os actually took,
how large they were.
If you are beating on the file system
very hard and you don't understand
why something is taking too long,
you just simply want to understand,
FS Usage is where you start.
Likewise, S Usage tells you the same sort
of thing about system calls.
It's a little more specific than Top,
in that it actually breaks down
the system calls by frequency,
gives you some other useful statistics.
If you're not quite sure what
your application is doing because
you don't necessarily have a
great deal of visibility into it,
this is another good one to look at.
I talked about virtual memory usage.
VM Map will give you a detailed
breakdown of all of the map regions
in your processor's address space.
If you're trying to work out
where your virtual space is going,
start here.
goes a little bit further and actually
breaks down the internal data structures
used by the system default malloc.
and it can also break down
Objective-C object allocations.
If you've decided from your use of
VM Map that malloc is the primary
offender in consuming virtual space,
this is where you go next.
There are a number of other
malloc-related debugging tools.
Malik history in particular
that can be used to track that
sort of thing even further.
But typically I would say that
once you've ascertained that
you have a mal-correlated issue,
what you actually have is an object
management issue inside your application.
And so you're going to need to look
at the way that you manage objects.
And at that point,
you might want to consider either
building a custom harness or using
DTrace in order to better understand
how you're actually allocating objects.
You may also simply be leaking.
Okay,
so you've taken a bunch of measurements.
Now what?
Oop, come back here.
There's a whole bunch of numbers.
What do they actually mean?
How do you use them?
The first and most important thing is
to actually understand how these numbers
relate to what your application is doing.
Once you've done that,
you can start looking at particular
portions of your application
that are responsible for those
numbers and understanding how
the code is being used in order to
in order to reach those numbers.
Once you've achieved that sort of
understanding-- and you'll note
that this is an understanding
of potentially a relatively
small portion of the application,
rather than understanding
the whole thing,
which is the whole objective of
this focusing part-- you can start
thinking about how to improve it.
Unfortunately,
it's at this point that performance
tuning becomes very application-specific.
We can talk about general rules
about resources and so forth,
but the actual flow of data
inside your application,
the flow of work inside the
application is what largely determines
how all of that is consumed.
And so it's at this point that you,
the owner of the application,
really have to come up to the front.
But there are some things
that you can think about.
The numbers will typically tell you that
you are doing something a great deal.
What are you doing?
Are you doing it too often?
Could you do it less?
Are you doing this in
an efficient fashion?
Specific things that you can
think about these actions.
You can also use the results of your
performance measurements to understand,
if you're not necessarily suffering
from performance problems,
what resource expectations
you actually have.
In order to perform a particular task,
how much of whatever this particular
thing is measuring are you consuming?
That leads, of course,
to the ability to deprive the application
of those resources and to understand
its behavior in a degenerate case.
I'm going to pull together
a really brief example here.
This actually occurred while
I was writing the slides for this.
I thought that I could use some time off,
and so I went out and bought a
spiffy new game and installed it.
I'm not going to finger the
developer of this game because
they were very responsive without
any action on my part in producing
a patch that addresses this issue.
Having installed the game and, of course,
wanting to minimize it so that I could
get back to working on my slides,
I noticed that the system
performance was terrible.
And so the obvious conclusion is that
this application is consuming resources,
it's not necessarily
being a good citizen.
So I start with top.
Minus DUX,
the arguments that I like to use.
And right there at the
top is my new game.
It's using a great deal of CPU.
And it's making an inordinate
number of BSD system calls.
In this particular sample,
there are 474,000 BSD system calls.
This is on a one second sample,
by the way.
So, BSD system calls, lots of them, huh?
So, let's have a look at what sort
of system calls it's making.
Someone's taken away my screen resource.
There we go.
Wrong button.
I always do that.
And so we can see there,
about halfway down the screen,
that in this particular
one-second sample,
we've made nearly 680,000
k-event system calls.
This is really not good for performance.
Fortunately for me,
the developer of this application
left all the symbols in it.
I sprang out another one of my favorite
"What on Earth is Going On" tools,
which I didn't mention before,
called Sample.
Some of you will be familiar
with the sample application
functionality in the Activity Monitor.
This is the command line
foundation for that tool.
It basically runs
I've got a core graph sample on an
application on all of the threads in
an application for a period of time.
In this case, I asked it for 10 seconds
worth of sampling.
There's an enormous amount of
other completely irrelevant
rubbish in the backtrace.
Like I said,
there are all the symbols in there,
so I can see their direct 3D
emulation on top of OpenGL and
all sorts of other stuff going on.
But all that looks like real work.
It looks like stuff that's actually
germane to the game running.
But there's also this particular one.
We're looking for k-event system calls,
right?
So of the 930 samples, yeah,
930 samples for this particular thread,
about 751 of them were inside k-event,
and about 150 of those were
downstream of k-event in a
function called findChangeHandle.
So something is going on that's causing
events to be sent to this application.
And this bit more to the point
to this particular handler.
At this point,
my ability to actually work out
what's going on has pretty much run
out because I'm going to need to
get the source to the application,
or I guess I could disassemble it.
But I'm going to need to know what this
findChangeHandle function actually does
in the larger context of the application.
But in just a few commands,
I've narrowed it down from "my
system performs really badly
because I'm running this game"
to "what is this function doing?"
And this is the beginning
of performance analysis.
Incidentally, the OT Atomic--
Was it?
There we are.
Yes.
OT Atomic Test Bit,
a function that's called out there.
Not really a great example
of performant coding.
There's a function, a regular function.
It's not inlined or anything like that.
It masks a single bit in a byte.
But in order to do this,
despite the fact that the
access to the byte is atomic,
and all the systems that this
code is likely to run on.
It takes and releases a lock.
Plus,
it also calls out to another function
just in case that lock hasn't been
actually initialized in the first place.
So this is a good example of things when
you're actually hunting in your code,
looking for low-level performance things.
If you see functions that are
implemented like this with
very short amounts of work,
bracketed by locks,
these are great low-hanging
fruit to attack.
So onto the,
I believe this is the fifth step,
taking advantage of work
that other people have done,
or in the case of system
provider services,
work that people will
continue to do in the future.
Before you can actually take
advantage of this stuff,
obviously,
you have to actually know what it is.
We do a pretty good job, I think,
of advertising the functionality
that the system exposes to
make life easier for you.
It's not too hard for you to
browse the documentation that
the good folks in DTS provide.
And they're always willing to answer your
questions about how to actually improve
the performance of your application,
leveraging system services.
These are things that we
expect you to be using,
so we're prepared to deal with
you asking questions about how to
actually take advantage of them.
The critical point I brought up talking
about the previous slide is that these
services will continue to improve.
Because we ship them,
because we use these services ourselves,
we constantly optimize
them for new platforms.
We constantly improve them
on existing platforms.
They're basically a free
performance upgrade for your
application if you're using them.
In adopting a system service,
there is always a cost.
I talked before about intermodule costs.
Here I am advocating modular
software design and code reuse
after just bashing it earlier on.
You've got to understand there's a
trade-off involved in all of this.
Typically, though,
leveraging a system service that
does something even moderately
complex is going to be easier than
implementing it from scratch yourself.
On top of that,
these services typically maintain stable
interfaces for long periods of time.
So your adoption cost is
usually only paid once,
provided of course your application's
internal architecture remains
likewise relatively stable.
If you duplicate some particular
piece of performance-sensitive
functionality and the system changes,
your implementation will
need to change as well.
And that obviously imposes an
ongoing maintenance burden that
you probably don't want to adopt.
It is worth bearing in mind though
that system services with nice,
stable, generalized interfaces often
impose some penalty in order to
achieve that sort of generality.
There's also potentially a loss
of critical differentiation.
If there's a system service that does
something that you honestly believe
and can measure that you do better,
if you adopt the system service,
you are potentially losing
that critical differentiation.
That being said,
if what you're doing is something that
is heavily used by other applications,
we're going to be
optimizing that as well.
And so the cost that you're
paying in order to maintain
that critical differentiation
may ultimately come to nothing.
I started off with about eight slides
worth of examples of system services,
which would make for a really
boring portion of this presentation.
So I culled this down to a list
of just a few high-point examples.
I've seen people
re-implement far too often.
I really wish they wouldn't.
MemCopy is right at the
very top of the list.
I talked about copies
being evil earlier on.
There are times when it
is simply inevitable that
you must copy information.
You're about to make a change to it.
You're going to throw
away the old version,
and the old version is going to change,
whatever.
There are any number of reasons
why copying something is
actually a necessary thing to do.
It's also,
from a performance perspective,
incredibly sensitive to the architecture
of the system that you're running on.
And in order to address
this particular concern,
we go to some fairly extensive lengths.
There are custom implementations
of MemCopy for virtually every
system that we've shipped.
It's becoming a little more stable
with some of the Intel systems,
but by and large,
those implementations of MemCopy
have specific knowledge of the
architecture of the individual
machine that they're running on.
And they're implemented in such
a fashion that there is little
or no overhead in determining
which version to actually use.
And
Keeping up with this, I mean,
this is a great example of why you
just shouldn't re-implement memcopy.
Keeping up with all of this work
that we've done to optimize this is
just a burden you don't need to pay.
There's very little to be gained in
terms of critical differentiation
by having a different memcopy.
XML parsers,
all sorts of mathematical functions,
image processing,
string manipulation really
belongs up there with memcopy.
Once again,
these are very cache and processor
architecture sensitive algorithms.
We've taken the time
to optimize them much,
much better for you just
to take advantage of that.
At a slightly higher level,
you find things like XGrid,
which allow you to build
distributed applications.
The list is, as I said,
really quite expansive.
We've made a little bit of hoo-ha
about 64-bit support in new hardware,
and not only that,
but in the upcoming Leopard
release of Mac OS X.
There's a lot to be said both
to encourage you and to perhaps
actually discourage you from
considering moving your applications
to a 64-bit environment.
Ultimately,
you and your customers are going
to be the ones that will decide
what the right criteria are,
when and how to actually make the switch.
That being said,
there are some advantages to
pursuing a 64-bit implementation at
the earliest possible convenience.
The large virtual address space
that 64-bit applications have
available to them does let you do
some fairly interesting things.
You do need to bear in mind the
point that I raised earlier about
virtual allocations costing.
But that being said,
you can do some fairly neat stuff
if you're no longer constrained
to a total of four gigs worth
of virtual address space.
You can consolidate things that
you may have previously had to
do in multiple address spaces
or by partitioning your data.
It also means that with more
heavily configured systems,
you can take advantage of more
physical memory in a single process.
For the Intel platform,
code performance does change.
The 64-bit code generation
is quite a bit different.
Just to begin with,
there are more registers.
This has enormous
impact on use of memory.
Algorithms that previously used to spill
into their one cache in particular can
now be implemented entirely in registers.
There's also considerable improvement in
the calling convention between functions,
making intermodule calls
potentially quite a lot cheaper.
[Transcript missing]
As I just mentioned,
maintaining a very large virtual space
has a cost that is not necessarily
paid directly by your application.
A large number of those address spaces
will simply exacerbate the situation.
There's also efficiency to be
considered if you're spreading
your data out a great deal more.
That effectively decreases the
multiplier effect of the cache size.
If your data is more sparsely spread,
particularly if you're using
a stride that is incompatible
with the way that the cache is
organized on a particular machine,
you may find that you have very
much negative caching implications.
It also becomes very difficult to, well,
very difficult is probably
the wrong way of putting it.
Leaky applications in a 32-bit
virtual space tend to bring
themselves to your attention by
running out of virtual address
space fairly quickly and crashing.
This doesn't happen with
64-bit applications.
You can leak until the heat death
of the universe and you're not
going to run out of virtual space.
The kernel will probably crash
because it'll run out of virtual
space to store those mappings,
but your app won't.
Some of the code performance changes
that I mentioned before are not so great.
CodeGen for 64-bit
Intel processors is still maturing,
and our understanding of that
code generation is still maturing.
This is something where--
Time will certainly
improve the situation.
By the time the leopard
is actually released,
we expect that we will understand
this a lot better and that much
of this will be ironed out.
Something that you need to measure,
however.
Every pointer in a 64-bit
application doubles in size.
If you have large, complex,
interlinked data structures,
this means that those
data structures will grow.
Any work that you've put in on a 32-bit
application for optimizing the structure
layout for cache line size will have to
be reconsidered because the association
of members inside the structure
will change because of this change.
On top of that, some opcodes also grow.
This means that if you've optimized
code for cache residency or for
timing related to memory fill,
that may also be perturbed by this.
And there is the unfortunate fact
that some of our machines will
simply never run 64-bit code.
If you want to run your application,
or if you want your application to be
able to run on one of those systems,
you need to consider building
both a 32-bit and a 64-bit
version of the application.
We make this pretty
straightforward with Xcode,
but there are algorithmic
and performance-related
implications for this.
In particular,
if you are considering re-optimizing your
application for a 64-bit environment,
some of those changes are likely
to perturb the way that it
performs in a 32-bit environment.
So going back over all of this,
I can really sum it all up with,
there is no magic bullet.
Making your application faster involves
you understanding it and doing real work.
Sorry.
But the five-step plan will help.
Because doing work takes time,
you should try and do less of it.
When you have something to do,
get on with it.
Treat other applications in the system
like you'd like them to treat you.
Don't just blow them off.
Performance tuning is not a black art.
It's a science.
It's a science that you can master.
We provide a bunch of
tools to help you with it.
We provide some great folks who
will help you if you need help.
Don't ever despair of understanding
what your application is doing,
why it's performing the way it is.
If you can't understand it
based on the data you have,
look for more data.
Consider in particular the enormous
advantage that DTrace gives you in
understanding specifically what your
application and what the environment
around your application is doing.
And take advantage of the
stuff that we're offering you.
The real value that you give
to your applications is the
neat stuff that you guys do.
Reimplementing code, algorithms,
functionality that Apple provides
to you is just wasting the time
that could be much better spent
making your customers happy.